[[Category:File systems]]
{{Article summary start}}
{{Article summary text|This page provides basic guidelines for installing the native ZFS Linux kernel module.}}
{{Article summary heading|Related}}
{{Article summary wiki|Installing Arch Linux on ZFS}}
{{Article summary wiki|ZFS on FUSE}}
{{Article summary end}}

[[Wikipedia:ZFS|ZFS]] is an advanced filesystem created by [[Wikipedia:Sun Microsystems|Sun Microsystems]] (now owned by Oracle) and released for OpenSolaris in November 2005.  Features of ZFS include: pooled storage (integrated volume management -- zpool), [[Wikipedia:Copy-on-write|Copy-on-write]], [[Wikipedia:Snapshot (computer storage)|snapshots]], data integrity verification and automatic repair (scrubbing), [[Wikipedia:RAID-Z|RAID-Z]], and a maximum [[Wikipedia:Exabyte|16 Exabyte]] volume size.  ZFS is licensed under the [[Wikipedia:CDDL|Common Development and Distribution License]] (CDDL).

Described as [http://web.archive.org/web/20060428092023/http://www.sun.com/2004-0914/feature/ "The last word in filesystems"] ZFS is stable, fast, secure, and future-proof.  Being licensed under the GPL incompatible CDDL, it is not possible for ZFS to be distributed along with the Linux Kernel. This requirement, however, does not prevent a native Linux kernel module from being developed and distributed by a third party, as is the case with [http://zfsonlinux.org/ zfsonlinux.org] (ZOL).

==Installation==

The ZFS kernel module is available in the [[AUR]] via {{aur|zfs}}.

{{note|The ZFS and SPL kernel modules are tied to a specific kernel version. It would not be possible to apply any kernel updates until updated packages are uploaded to AUR or the archzfs repository.}}

===Unofficial repository===

For fast and effortless installation and updates, the [http://demizerone.com/archzfs "archzfs"] signed repository is available to add to your <code>pacman.conf</code>:

{{hc|/etc/pacman.conf|<nowiki>
[archzfs]
Server = http://demizerone.com/$repo/core/$arch</nowiki>
}}

{{note|This repository does not yet support i686.}}

The repository and packages are signed with the maintainer's PGP key which is verifiable here: http://demizerone.com. This key is not trusted by any of the Arch Linux master keys, so it will need to be locally signed before use. See [[pacman-key]].

Add the maintainer's key,

    # pacman-key -r 0EE7A126

and locally sign to add it to the system's trust database,

    # pacman-key --lsign-key 0EE7A126

Once the key has been signed, it is now possible to update the package database,

    # pacman -Syy

and install ZFS packages:

    # pacman -S archzfs

===Archzfs testing repository===

If you have the testing repository active in {{ic|pacman.conf}} then it is possible to use the archzfs repository that tracks the testing kernel.

{{hc|# /etc/pacman.conf|<nowiki>
[archzfs]
Server = http://demizerone.com/$repo/testing/$arch</nowiki>
}}

===Archiso tracking repository===

ZFS can easily be used from within the archiso live environment by using the special archiso tracking repository for ZFS. This repository makes it easy to install Arch Linux on a root ZFS filesystem, or to mount ZFS pools from within an archiso live environment using an up-to-date live medium. To use this repository from the live environment, add the following server line to pacman.conf:

{{hc|/etc/pacman.conf|<nowiki>
[archzfs]
Server = http://demizerone.com/$repo/archiso/$arch</nowiki>
}}

This repository and packages are also signed, so the key must be locally signed following the steps listed in the previous section before use. For a guide on how to install Arch Linux on to a root ZFS filesystem, see [[Installing Arch Linux on ZFS]].

==Configuration==

ZFS is considered a "zero administration" filesystem by its creators, therefore configuring ZFS is very straight forward. Configuration is done primarily with two commands, {{ic|zfs}} and {{ic|zpool}}.

===mkinitramfs hook===

If you are using ZFS on your root filesystem, then you will need to add the ZFS hook to [[Mkinitcpio|mkinitcpio.conf]]. If you are not using ZFS for your root filesystem, then you do not need to add the ZFS hook.

You will need to change your [[kernel parameters]] to include the dataset you want to boot. You can use <code>zfs=bootfs</code> to use the ZFS bootfs (set via <code>zpool set bootfs=rpool/ROOT/arch rpool</code>) or you can set the [[kernel parameters]] to <code>zfs=<pool>/<dataset></code> to boot directly from a ZFS dataset.

To see all available options for the ZFS hook:

  $ mkinitcpio -H zfs

To use the mkinitcpio hook, you will need to add <code>zfs</code> to your <code>HOOKS</code> in <code>/etc/mkinitcpio.conf</code>:

{{hc|/etc/mkinitcpio.conf|
...
HOOKS<nowiki>="base udev autodetect modconf encrypt zfs filesystems usbinput"</nowiki>
...
}}

{{note|It is not necessary to use the "fsck" hook with ZFS. ZFS automatically fixes any errors that occur within the filesystem. However, if the hook is required for another filesystem used on the system, such as ext4, the current ZFS packaging implementation does not yet properly handle fsck requests from mkinitcpio and an error is produced when generating a new ramdisk.}}

It is important to place this after any hooks which are needed to prepare the drive before it is mounted. For example, if your ZFS volume is encrypted, then you will need to place encrypt before the zfs hook to unlock it first.

Recreate the ramdisk

  # mkinitcpio -p linux

===Automatic Start===

For ZFS to live by its "zero administration" namesake, the zfs daemon must bee loaded at startup. A benefit to this is that it is not necessary to mount your zpool in {{ic|/etc/fstab}}; the zfs daemon imports and mounts your zfs pool automatically.

==Systemd==

Enable the service so it is automatically started at boot time

  # systemctl enable zfs.service

To manually start the daemon

  # systemctl start zfs.service

==Initscripts==
Add zfs to DAEMONS list

{{hc|/etc/rc.conf|
...
DAEMONS<nowiki>=(... @syslog-ng zfs dbus ...)</nowiki>
...
}}

And now start the daemon if it is not started already

  # rc.d start zfs

===Create a storage pool===

Use {{ic| # parted --list}} to see a list of all available drives. It is not necessary to partition your drives before creating the zfs filesystem, this will be done automatically. However, if you feel the need to completely wipe your drive before creating the filesystem, this can be easily done with the dd command.

  # dd if=/dev/zero of=/dev/<device>

It should not have to be stated, but be careful with this command!

Once you have the list of drives, it is now time to get the id's of the drives you will be using. The [http://zfsonlinux.org/faq.html#WhatDevNamesShouldIUseWhenCreatingMyPool zfs on linux developers recommend] using device ids when creating ZFS storage pools of less than 10 devices. To find the id's for your device, simply

  $ ls -lah /dev/disk/by-id/

The ids should look similar to the following:

  lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Aug 12 16:26 ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0JKRR -> ../../sdc
  lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Aug 12 16:26 ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0JTM1 -> ../../sde
  lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Aug 12 16:26 ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0KBP8 -> ../../sdd
  lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root  9 Aug 12 16:26 ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0KDGY -> ../../sdb

Now finally, create the ZFS pool:

  # zpool create -m <mount> <pool> raidz <ids>

or as an example

  # zpool create -f -m /mnt/data bigdata raidz ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0KDGY ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0JKRR ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0KBP8 ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0JTM1

* '''create''': subcommand to create the pool.

* '''pool''': This is the name of the pool. Change it to whatever you like.

* '''-f''': Force creating the pool. This is to overcome the "EFI label error". See [[#does not contain an EFI label]].

* '''-m''': The mount point of the pool. If this is not specified, than your pool will be mounted to {{ic|/<pool>}}.

* '''raidz''': This is the type of virtual device that will be created from the pool of devices. Raidz is a special implementation of raid5. See [https://blogs.oracle.com/bonwick/entry/raid_z Jeff Bonwick's Blog -- RAID-Z] for more information about raidz.

* '''ids''': The names of the drives or partitions that you want to include into your pool. Get it from {{ic|/dev/disk/by-id}}.

If the command is successful, there will be no output. Using the {{ic|$ mount}} command will show that you pool is mounted. Using {{ic|# zpool status}} will show that your pool has been created.

{{hc|# zpool status|
  pool: bigdata
 state: ONLINE
 scan: none requested
config:

        NAME                                       STATE     READ WRITE CKSUM
        bigdata                                    ONLINE       0     0     0
          -0                                       ONLINE       0     0     0
            ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0KDGY-part1  ONLINE       0     0     0
            ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0JKRR-part1  ONLINE       0     0     0
            ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0KBP8-part1  ONLINE       0     0     0
            ata-ST3000DM001-9YN166_S1F0JTM1-part1  ONLINE       0     0     0

errors: No known data errors
}}

At this point it would be good to reboot your computer to make sure your ZFS pool is mounted at boot. It is best to deal with all errors before transferring your data.

== Usage ==

To see all the commands available in ZFS, use

  $ man zfs

or

  $ man zpool

=== Scrub ===

ZFS pools should be scrubbed at least once a week. To scrub your pool

  # zpool scrub <pool>

To do automatic scrubbing once a week, set the following line in your root crontab

{{hc|# crontab -e|
...
30 19 * * 5 zpool scrub <pool>
...
}}

Replace {{ic|<pool>}} with the name of your ZFS storage pool.

=== Check zfs pool status ===

To print a nice table with statistics about your ZFS pool, including and read/write errors, use

  # zpool status -v

=== Destroy a storage pool ===

ZFS makes it easy to destroy a mounted storage pool, removing all metadata about the ZFS device. This command destroys any data contained in the pool.

  # zpool destroy <pool>

and now when checking the status

{{hc|# zpool status|no pools available}}

To find the name of your pool, see [[#Check zfs pool status]].

=== Export a storage pool ===

If you are going to use the pool in a different system, or are doing
==Troubleshooting==

=== does not contain an EFI label ===

The following error will occur when attempting to create a zfs filesystem,

  /dev/disk/by-id/<id> does not contain an EFI label but it may contain partition

The way to overcome this is to use <code>-f</code> with the zfs create command.

=== No hostid found ===

An error that occurs at boot with the following lines appearing before initscript output:

  ZFS: No hostid found on kernel command line or /etc/hostid.

This warning occurs because the ZFS module does not have access to the spl hosted. There are two solutions, for this. You can either place your spl hostid in the [[kernel parameters]] in your boot loader. For example, adding <code>spl_hostid=0x00bab10c</code>.

The other solution is to make sure that there is a hostid in <code>/etc/hostid</code>, and then regenerate the initramfs image. Which will copy the hostid into the initramfs image.

  # mkinitcpio -p linux

== Tips and tricks ==

=== Emergency chroot repair with archzfs ===

Here is how to use the archiso to get into your ZFS filesystem for maintenance.

Boot the latest archiso and bring up your network

    # wifi-menu
    # ip link set eth0 up

Test the network connection

    # ping google.com

Sync the pacman package database

    # pacman -Syy

(optional) Install your favorite text editor

    # pacman -S vim

Add archzfs archiso repository to {{ic|pacman.conf}}

{{hc|/etc/pacman.conf|<nowiki>
[archzfs]
Server = http://demizerone.com/$repo/archiso/$arch</nowiki>}}

Sync the pacman package database

    # pacman -Syy

Install the ZFS package group

    # pacman -S archzfs

Load the ZFS kernel modules

    # modprobe zfs

Import your pool

    # zpool import -a -R /mnt

Mount your boot partitions (if you have them)

    # mount /dev/sda2 /mnt/boot
    # mount /dev/sda1 /mnt/boot/efi

Chroot into your zfs filesystem

    # arch-chroot /mnt /bin/bash

Check your kernel version

    # pacman -Qi linux
    # uname -r

uname will show the kernel version of the archiso. If they are different, you will need to run depmod (in the chroot) with the correct kernel version of your chroot installation:

    # depmod -a 3.6.9-1-ARCH (version gathered from pacman -Qi linux)

This will load the correct kernel modules for the kernel version installed in your chroot installation.

Regenerate your ramdisk

    # mkinitcpio -p linux

There should be no errors.

== See also ==

* [http://zfsonlinux.org/ ZFS on Linux]
* [http://zfsonlinux.org/faq.html ZFS on Linux FAQ]
* [http://www.freebsd.org/doc/en_US.ISO8859-1/books/handbook/filesystems-zfs.html FreeBSD Handbook -- The Z File System]
* [http://docs.oracle.com/cd/E19253-01/819-5461/index.html Oracle Solaris ZFS Administration Guide]
* [http://www.solarisinternals.com/wiki/index.php/ZFS_Troubleshooting_Guide Solaris Internals -- ZFS Troubleshooting Guide]
